[Prefatory and Introductory Verses] Homage to the Omniscient One
1-2. Having bowed down before the Chief One in the world, who crossed over the boundless attachment to suffering, who was a flag of glory celebrated in the three worlds, whose lion's roar made apparent the roar of the True dharma. who reached the jeweled treasure of omniscience, whose feet were rubbed by the crest-jewels of Brahma's egg, I will explain the treasury of jewels, which is the moral precepts relating to omniscience, in the middle of the community of monks. 3. This Pratimokṣa is called the essence, the heart and foundation of the limitless andunfathomable water of the ocean of Vinaya of the Buddha. 4. This is the compendium of the True Dharma written by the King of the True Dharma. This great treaty consists of articles of precepts for the monks who are like a guild of merchants. 5. This is the medicine for impeding the venom of those corrupted by bad śīla. This is the goad stick for youths bewildered by their youthfulness. 6. This is the raft for crossing over the deep ocean of saṃsāra. [This is] the foremost guide for a king. 7. This stands like a ladder for ascending the city of release. It has been proclaimed, “When I enter Nirvāṇa, this [Prātimokṣa] will be your Teacher." 8. The hearing of the Prātimokṣa is hard to obtain in ten millions of ages; even going beyond, to grasp and to bear [it] is much more difficult to obtain. 9. Happy is the birth of Buddhas, happy is the knowledge of the Dharma; Happy is the concord in the saṃgha, happy is the tapas of the Śramaṇas. 10. Happy is the sight of the noble ones, happy also is association with the truth; Absence of the sight of the ignorant should be a constant happiness." 11. Happy is seeing the disciplined ones, happy is seeing the learned ones; And seeing the arhants is happy (i.e., good) for the removal of rebirths. 12. Happy is the river, happy is the bank of the river, happy is the person who has acquired Dharma; Happy is the attainment of prajna, happy indeed is the destruction of egotism. 13. Happy is the condition of those learned ones who have made fixed intentions and subdued their senses; [Happy is the condition] of those gone to old age in peaceful forests of those having spent their youthfulness in forests.
[Introduction] Leader: O Venerable Ones. so many hot seasons have passed, so many remain. Life passes, old age and death approach. The Teaching of the Teacher is diminishing. Yoga should be practiced by the Venerable Ones with diligence. The Tathāgatas, Arhants, Fully Enligbtened Ones obtained the wholesome bodhipakṣya dharmas, indeed conducive to bodhi, by diligence, What preliminaries of the Śrāvaka-saṃgha of the Blessed One should be done? Response: Little, there is little to be done. Leader: Let the Venerable Ones announce the complete purity?” and consent of those who have not arrived, and having announced it, make it known.
14. Bowing down to the Lion of the Sakyas, and a reverential salute having been made, I will proclaim the Prātimokṣa, and let one hear that Vinaya from me. 15, And having heard that, let one act here as proclaimed by the great sage; by making an effort [and] by being without [even] minute sins. 16, For one who constantly, quickly, and with effort pursues his horselike mind with statements from the mouth [of the Buddha], Prātimokṣa is like the bit of a bridle from which one hundred sharp thorns are shot. 17. The great-minded ones who do not turn away from the proper station [even] by mere words, are indeed horse-like men who will be victorious in the battle of the kleśas. 18. But for the unrestrained ones to whom this is not known to be a bridle, and is not even desired in their hearts, in the battle of the kleśas, they will be bewildered by confusion.
Leader: O Venerable Sirs. Let the saṃgha listen. Today is the fourteenth or fifteenth day [of the lunar month], Poṣadha day for the saṃgha. If it seems good [and the saṃgha] should agree that it is the right time for the saṃgha. The saṃgha should perform Poṣadha and recite the Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation. This is the motion.
Response: O Venerable Ones1 we will perform the Poṣadha and recite the Prātimokṣa Sūtra. Leader: For whom there may be a fault, it should be confessed by that one. If there is no fault, [one] should be silent. By being silent, we will understand the Venerable Ones to be completely pure. Just as there is an answer by a monk when questioned individually, so also there is the threefold public proclamation in such an assembly of monks. For whatever monk, being questioned in this way three times in the assembly of monks, who does not reveal an existing fault which is remembered, there is the speaking of a deliberate lie. Speaking a deliberate lie, O Venerable Ones, has assuredly been declared by the Blessed One to be an obstructive condition. Therefore, an existing fault should be revealed by a fallen monk, remembering [the offense and] hoping for purity. By revealing it, there is comfort for him, but by not revealing it, there is none.
O Venerable Ones, the introduction of the Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation has been recited by me. Concerning this, I ask the Venerable Ones – What about it, you, who are assembled here, are you completely pure?A second and also a third time I ask – Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones here are completely pure. This I thus accept.
The Four Pārājika Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the four pārājika dharmas come up in the halfmonthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. Whatever monk, having undertaken life of monastic training, should, not having rejected the training and not having revealed his weakness in the training, indulge in the unchaste intercourse, i.e. sexual union, even to the extreme case as with an animal, this monk is pārājika, and [the monastic community] cannot live with him.
2. Whatever monk should take from others what is not given, be it in a village or forest, in a manner considered to be theft, and by such form of theft, a king or king's minister, having seized him, would slay, bind, or banish him, saying, “O man, you are a thief, you are a fool, you are confused, you are a robber”; should the monk take in this way what is not given, this monk is pārājika, and [the monastic community] cannot live with him.
3. Whatever monk should, as premeditated, with his own hand, deprive a human or one that has human form2 of his life, supply somebody with a knife [so he can kill himself], search for an assassin to kill him, instigate him to die, or praise death, saying, “O man, what use is this dreadful, impure, sinful life to you? O man, death is better than life for you”; should [the monk] purposefully, being of one opinion, instigate him in many ways to death, or recommend the nature of death to him, and he (i.e., that man) should die by that [means], and [the monastic community] cannot live with him.
4. Whatever monk, unknowing and not understanding, should boast of having superhuman faculties, sufficient knowledge and the specific spiritual realization of the nobles, and insight and a state of comforts which are inexistent and unobtained [by him], saying, “I know this, I see this”; and at a later time, the fallen [monk], having purity in view, being made responsible or not being made responsible, should say, “O Venerable Ones, I said I know, I see, [but, it was] worthless, vain, false speaking”; unless [spoken] because of pride, this monk is pārājika, expelled.
O Venerable Ones, the four pārājika dharmas have been recited by me. Whatever monk, having committed one or another fault, is not to obtain dwelling or eating together with the monks. As before (he became a monk, he was a layman), so after (that he committed the pārājika he becomes a layman again),3 he is (thus) pārājika and the monks cannot liv with him. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
The Thirteen Saṃghāvaśeṣa Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the thirteen saṃghāvaśeṣa dharmas come up in the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sutra recitation.
1. Intentional emission of semen, though it is a different matter if it is during sleep, is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
2. Whatever monk, with impassioned4 mind, should come into bodily contact with a woman, taking her hand, taking her arm, taking her hair, touching one or another of her limbs, or should indulge in stroking her limbs, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
3. Whatever monk, with impassioned mind, should speak to a woman with bad, evil, or vulgar language connected with sexual intercourse, just as a young man [speaks] to a young woman. that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
4. Whatever monk, with impassioned mind, should recommend, in front of a woman, [sexual] service with the body to himself, saying, “Sister, this is the highest of services; namely, that one should serve with this act connected with sexual intercourse, a monk like me who is well disciplined, virtuous and chaste”; that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
5. Whatever monk should undertake to act as a go-between, [bringing] a man to a woman or a woman to a man. so much as for 'a wife. a lover, or even for a moment, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
6. When a monk, by begging himself, is having a hut built, having no donor and intended for himself, the hut should be built according to measure. This is the measure for the hut: in length, twelve spans of the Sugata-span in width, seven spans inside. Monks should be brought by that monk for viewing the site. The site should be viewed by those monks who are brought to not involve slaughter and be good for roaming about. If the monk should have the hut built, for which he begged himself, having no donor and intended for himself, on a site which involves destruction and is not good for roaming about, or should he not bring monks to view the site, or should he exceed the measure on a site which has not been viewed by the, monks who were not brought, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
7. When a monk is having a large vihāra built, with a donor and intended for the saṃgha, monks should he brought by that monk for viewing of the site. Hence, the site should be viewed by those monks who are brought to not involve slaughter and be food for roaming about. If the monk is having a large vihāra built, which has a donor and is intended for the saṃgha, on a site which is not good for roaming about, or should he not bring the monks for viewing of the site, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
8. Whatever monk, angry because of hostility, should accuse a pure monk of a groundless pārājika dharma, thinking, “Just so, I will cause him to fall from the pure life”; and at a later time, when he is being examined or not being examined, that legal question of his [is determined to be] groundless, and the monk should stand fast because of hostility, saying, “I spoke in hostility”; that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
9. Whatever monk, angry because of hostility, taking up something merely as a pretext for a legal question connected with something contrary or other, should accuse a pure monk of a pārājika dharma, thinking, “Just so, I will cause him to fall from the pure life”; and at a later time, when he is being examined or not being examined, that legal question [is determined to be connected with something else, that thing is used merely as a pretext pointing to something [else], and the monk should stand fast in his hostility, saying, “I spoke because of hostility”; that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
10. Whatever monk should proceed toward a division of a saṃgha which is harmonious, or having taken up a legal question conducive to causing a schism, should persist in taking it up, that monk should be spoken to thus by the monks: “The Venerable One should not proceed toward a division of the saṃgha which is harmonious, or having taken up a legal question conducive to causing a schism, persist in taking it up. Let the Venerable One come together with the saṃgha, for the saṃgha is harmonious, united, on friendly terms, without dispute, and dwells in a happy condition under a one-pointed Dharma exposition, being like milk and water, demonstrating the Teaching”?” of the Teacher. Abandon, O Venerable One, such a course which causes a schism in the saṃgha.” If that monk, being spoken to by the monks, should abandon that course,". this is good. If he should not abandon it, he should be examined and instructed a second and a third time for the abandonment of that course. Should he, being examined and instructed a second and a third time, abandon that course, this is good. If he should not abandon it, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
11. If there are one, two, three, or many monk-comrades of a monk who is a speaker of disunion, and should these monks say to those [other] monks, “Do not, O Venerable Ones, say anything good or bad about this monk. Why? This monk, O Venerable Ones, speaks according to the Dharma and according to the Vinaya, and taking up our wish and objective, obtains [them]. This monk speaks knowingly and not unknowingly, and that which pleases this monk also pleases and seems good to us.” These monks [siding with the schism-maker] should be spoken to thus by the monks: “Do not let the Venerable Ones speak this way. That monk does not speak according to the Dharma and according to the Vinaya. [Do not say that that monk], taking up our wish and objective, obtains [them]. [Do not say] that monk speaks knowingly and not unknowingly, and that which pleases and seems good to that monk also seems good to you. Also, O Venerable Ones, do not take delight in a schism in the saṃgha, Again, do not [allow] a schism in the saṃgha to [provide] delight for the Venerable Ones. Let the Venerable Ones come together with the saṃgha, for the saṃgha is harmonious, on friendly terms, without dispute, and dwells in a happy condition under a one-pointed Dharma exposition, being one like milk and water, demonstrating the Teaching of the Teacher. Do not, O Venerable One, persist toward a division of the saṃgha. Abandon this form of speech which causes a division in the saṃgha.” These [schismatic] monks should be examined and instructed a second and a third time by the [other] monks for the abandonment of that course, and should they, being examined and instructed a second and a third time, abandon that course, this is good. If they should not abandon it, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa,
12. If many monks who are corrupters of families and practitioners of evil should dwell near a certain village or town and the families corrupted by these [monks] should be seen, heard, or known of, these monks should be spoken to thus by the monks: “The Venerable Ones are corrupters of families and practitioners of evil, and the families corrupted by you are seen, heard, and known of. Depart, O Venerable Ones, from this āvāsa, You have lived here long enough!” If these [evil] monks should say to those [other] monks: “The monks, O Venerable Ones, are followers of desire, followers of malice, followers of delusion, and followers of fear. They banish some monks because of faults such as these, but do not banish some [other] monks”; the monks should be spoken to thus: “Do not, O Venerable Ones, speak in this way; that some monks are followers of desire, followers of malice, followers of delusion, and followers of fear; that they banish some monks because of faults such as these, but do not banish some [other] monks. Why? These monks are not followers of desire, followers of malice, followers of delusion, and followers of fear, but you Venerable Ones are indeed corrupters of families and practitioners of evil. The families corrupted by you are seen and heard, and your evil practices are seen, heard, and known of. [You] monks, O Venerable Ones, are followers of desire, followers of malice, followers of delusion, and followers of fear. Abandon this form of speech.” These [evil] monks should be spoken to thus by the monks. If they should abandon it, this is good. If they should not abandon if, they should be examined and instructed a second and a third time for the abandonment [of that course]. Should they, being examined and instructed a second and a third time, abandon [that course], this is good. If they should not abandon it, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
13. If some monk here who is difficult to speak to, being spoken to by the monks in accordance with the Dharma and in accordance with the Vinaya, concerning the moral precepts included in the exposition and included in the Sūtras of the Sugata, makes himself one who is not to be spoken to, saying, “Do not, O Venerable Ones, say anything to me, either good or bad, and also I will not say anything good or bad to the Venerable Ones. Let the Venerable Ones abstain from speaking to me, and also I will abstain from speaking to you”; that monk should be spoken to thus by the monks: “You, o Venerable One, being spoken to by the monks in accordance with the Dharma and in accordance with the Vinaya, concerning the moral precepts included in the exposition and included in the Sūtras of the Sugata, make yourself one who is not to be spoken to. Let the Venerable One make himself one who is to be spoken to. Let the monks speak to the Venerable One in accordance with the Dharma and in accordance with the Vinaya, and also let the Venerable One speak to the monks in accordance with the Dharma and in accordance with the Vinaya, for thus, through mutual speech and through mutual helping to eliminate faults, will the community of the Blessed One, the Tathāgata, the Arhant, the Fully Enlightened One, be bound together. Do not let the Venerable One make himself one who is not to be spoken to.” That monk should be spoken to thus by the monks. If he should abandon that course, this is good. If he should not abandon it, he should be examined and instructed a second and a third time for the abandonment of that [course]. Should he, being examined and instructed a second and a third time, abandon that course, this is good.lfhe should not abandon it, that is a saṃghāvaśeṣa.
O Venerable Ones, the thirteen saṃghāvaśeṣa dharmashave been recited by me: nine which become faults at once and four which do not become faults up to the third admonition. If a monk has fallen into one or another of these [faults], so much time [parivāsa] should be spent by that [monk], even unwillingly, as he knowingly conceals it. When that monk, even unwillingly, has completed the parivāsa, six more nights should be spent [undergoing] mānatva in the saṃgha. When the mānatva has been completed, the monk, with satisfied mind, should be pardoned by the avarhana ceremony” by the Bhikṣu-saṃgha, done according to Dharma. If the; Bhikṣu-saṃgha is a group of twenty, that monk should be reinstated. If a Bhikṣu-saṃgha should reinstate that monk while being a group of twenty lacking by even one [monk], that monk is not reinstated and the monks are blameworthy. This is the proper conduct. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
The Two Aniyata Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the two aniyata dharmas come up in the halfmonthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. Whatever monk should sit down with a woman, one with the other, in secret, on a concealed seat suitable to have sexual intercourse, and if a trustworthy upāsikā should accuse [him] of one or another of three dharmas: [either] with a pārājika, saṃghāvaśeṣa, or pāyāntika dharma, that monk, admitting that he was so seated, should be dealt with according to one or another of threedharmas: [either] a pārājika, saṃghāvaśeṣa, or pāyāntika dharma; or by whichever dharma that trustworthy upasika should accuse that monk. So should that monk be dealt with by this or that dharma. This is an aniyata.
2. Whatever monk should sit down with a woman, one with the other,in secret, on a concealed seat not suitable to have sexual intercourse.lv” and if a trustworthy upasika should accuse [him] of one or another of two dharmas: [either] with a saṃghāvaśeṣa or pāyāntika dharma, that monk, because of admitting that he was so seated, [should be dealt with] according to one or another of two dharmas: [either] a saṃghāvaśeṣa or pāyāntika dharma; or by whichever dharma that trustworthy upasika should accuse that monk. So should that monk be dealt with by this or that dharma. This is an aniyata.
O Venerable Ones, the two aniyata dharmas have been recited by me. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask the Venerable Ones - Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
The Thirty Niḥsargika-Pāyantika Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the thirty niḥsargika-pāyāntika dharmas come up in the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. When a monk has been provided with a [set of] robes, and the kaṭhina ceremony has been suspended, an extra, optional robe may be worn up to ten days. Should he wear it beyond that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
2. If a monk who has been provided with a [set of] robes, when the kaṭhina ceremony has been suspended, should be separated, outside the sīma, from one or another of the three robes, even for one night, except with the permission of the saṃgha, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
3. A robe accruing to a monk at the wrong time: when he has been provided with a [set of] robes, and the kaṭhina ceremony has been suspended, may be accepted by that monk if he wishes. Having accepted that robe, and making it up quickly, it should be worn if it is completed. If it is not completed, that robe should be laid aside by that monk for a month at the most when hope exists that he may complete the deficiency of the robe. Should he lay it aside in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
4. Whatever monk should have an old robe washed. dyed, or beaten by an unrelated nun, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
5. Whatever monk should accept a robe from a nearby, unrelated nun, except in exchange, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
6. Whatever monk, having approached an unrelated householder or householder's wife, should ask for a robe, except at the right time, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika. Under those circumstances, this is the right time: when a monk is one whose robe has been stolen. whose robe has been destroyed. whose robe has been burned, whose robe has been washed away, whose robe has been carried off [by wind]. This is the right time in this matter.
7. When a monk whose robe has been stolen, whose robe has been destroyed. whose robe has been burned, whose robe has been washed away, or whose robe has been carried off [by wind], having approached an unrelated householder or householder's wife, should ask for a robe, if that faithful [wife] or Brāhmaṇa householder should offer that one excessively, regarding [material for] many robes, [material for] an inner and upper robe at the most should be accepted from that one by the monk, if he wishes. Should he accept in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
8. If robe prices are assembled, having been intended for a monk, by an unrelated householder or householder's wife, thinking, “Such named monk will approach, and I, having purchased such and such a robe with these robe prices, will present him with a robe, properly, at the right time”; and if one monk, approaching, but not having been previously invited, [seeking to] obtain a gift, should say to that unrelated householder or householder's wife: “These are robe prices which, having been assembled by the Venerable One, are intended for me. Indeed it is good for you, O Venerable One, that you should, having purchased such and such a robe with the robe prices, present [me] with a robe, properly, at the right time”; in the obtaining of the robe, there is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
9. If various robe prices are assembled, having been intended for a monk, by an unrelated householder and a householder's wife, thinking, “The monk will approach, and we, [having each purchased a robe] with these various [robe prices], will present that one with the two robes, one by one, properly, at the right time”; and if that monk, approaching, but not having been previously invited, [seeking to] procure a gift, should say to that unrelated householder or householder's wife: “These are various robe prices which, having been assembled by the Venerable One, are intended for me. Indeed it is good. Let the Venerable Ones, having purchased such and such a robe with the various robe prices, present [me] with a robe, properly, at the right time, both [prices] for one [robe]”; ill the obtaining of the robe, having taken up the desire for something excellent, there is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
10. If robe prices have been sent forth in the hand of a messenger, baving been intended for a monk. by a king, or king's minister, or Brāhmaṇa, or householder, or townsman, or country dweller, or wealthy man, or wealthy merchant, or caravan leader, then that messenger, taking up those prices, should go up to where the monk is, and having approached, should say to that monk: “The Noble One should know that robe prices have been sent forth, having been intended for you, by a king, or king's minister, or Brahmans, or householder, or townsman, or country dweller, or wealthy man, or wealthy merchant, or caravan leader. Let the Noble One, having taken up compassion, accept [the robe prices].” That messenger should be spoken to thus by that monk: “Go, venerable messenger. It is ruin for monks to accept robe prices. but we do accept a robe, having obtained it properly. at the right time.” That messenger should say to that monk: “Is there some vaiyyāvṛtyakara of the Noble Ones who undertakes the work of the Noble Ones?” The vaiyyāvṛtyakara should be pointed out by the monk desiring a robe-either an aramika or an upasaka, saying, “These vaiyyāvṛtyakaras, o messenger, undertake the work of the monks.” Then that messenger, taking up the robe prices, should go up to where the vaiyyāvṛtyakara is, and having approached, should say to that vaiyyāvṛtyakara: “You should know, O Venerable vaiyyāvṛtyakara, that such named monk will approach. and you, having purchased such and such a robe with these robe prices, should present him with a robe, properly, at the right time.” Then that messenger. having admonished and instructed that vaiyyāvṛtyakara properly and thoroughly, should go up to where that monk is, and having approached, should say to that monk: “That vaiyyāvṛtyakara who was pointed out by the Noble One has been instructed. You should approach him at the right time, and he will present you with a robe, properly, at the right time.” The vaiyyāvṛtyakara, having been approached by the monk desiring a robe. should be requested and reminded two or three times: “I am, O Venerable vaiyyāvṛtyakara, in need of a robe; I am. O Venerable vaiyyāvṛtyakara, in need of a robe.” If. having been requested and reminded two or three times. that robe is obtained, this is good.lfhe should not obtain it, he should stand silently in this spot up to four. five. or six times. If. standing silently in this spot up to four. five, or six times. he should obtain the robe. this is good. If he should not obtain it, he should not pursue it'!' beyond that. If [he should further exert himself] for the obtainment of the robe, in obtaining the robe, there is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika, Ifhe should not obtain [the robe]. he should go himself to the place from which these robe prices were brought. or a trusted messenger should be sent. saying. “These robe prices which were sent by the Venerable Ones. having been intended for such named monk, do not serve any use for that monk. Let the Venerable Ones know your own wealth. Do not let your wealth go to ruin.
----------
11. Whatever monk should have a new rug made of silk, that is a Niḥsargika-Pāyantika.
12. Whatever monk should have a new rug made of pure black sheep's wool, that is the niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
13. When a monk is having a new rug made, two portions of pure black sheep's wool should be taken, the third of white, and the fourth of tawny. If a monk should have a new rug made. not taking up two portions of pure black sheep's wool, the third of white, and the fourth of tawny, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
14. When a monk is having a new rug made, having been made, it should be used, even unwillingly, for six years. If the monk, before the six years are up, either casting aside or not casting aside that old rug, should have another new rug made, except with the permission of the saṃgha, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
15. When a monk is having a rug for sitting on made, a Sugata-span should be taken from the old rug for sitting on, on all sides, to disfigure the new [rug], If a monk should use a new rug for sitting on, not taking up a Sugata-span from the old rug for sitting on, on all sides, to disfigure the new [rug], that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
16. Should sheep's wool accrue to a monk when on a journey, it may be accepted by that monk if he wishes, and having accepted it, it may be carried by him up to three yojanas when there is no carrier. Should he carry it in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
17. Whatever monk should have sheep's wool washed, dyed, or combed out by an unrelated nun, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
18. Whatever monk should, with his own hand, acquire gold or silver, or cause it to be acquired.P that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
19. Whatever monk should undertake various activities in money, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
20. Whatever monk should undertake various [kinds of] buying and selling, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
----------
21. An extra bowl may be kept by a monk for ten days at the most. Should he maintain it in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika,
22. Whatever monk, having taken up the desire for something excellent, should seek another new bowl when his [old] bowl, which is fit for use, has been repaired in less than five places, [is guilty], in the obtaining of the bowl, [of) a niḥsargika-pāyāntika, That bowl should be forfeited to the assembly of monks by that monk. That which is the last bowl in that assembly of monks should be given to that monk, saying: “This [bowl] is for you, 0 monk. It should be depended on, and should not be changed. Having taken it up, it should be used gradually until it is entirely broken.” This is the proper course in this matter.
23. Whatever monk, by begging yarn himself, should have a robe woven by an unrelated weaver, in the obtaining of that robe, there is a Niḥsargikapāyāntika.
24. If an unrelated householder or householder's wife should have a robe woven by an unrelated weaver, having been intended for a monk, and if that monk, approaching, but not having been previously invited, in [seeking to] procure a gift, should say to that weaver: “Know, O Venerable weaver, that this robe which is being woven has been intended for me. That is good, 0 venerable weaver. Make the robe wide, well-scraped, well-formed, and wellbeaten. If you do so, we, in order to obtain the robe, will collect some money for the venerable weaver, namely: alms food, the substance in a 'begging bowl, or the provisions in a begging bowl”; in the obtaining of the robe, there is a nil)sargika-pāyāntika. .
25. Whatever monk, having given a robe to a monk, and afterwards. being angry, mad, wrathful, and ill-tempered. should snatch away or cause [the robe] to be snatched away, and should say to him, in taking it back: “Moreover, O monk, I did not give the robe to you”; that robe and that remainder"< should be forfeited by that [angry] monk to the one who made use of it and that is a nil)sargika-pāyāntika.
26. Should a special robe accrue to a monk ten days before the full moon of Kārtika, it may be accepted by that monk if he wishes. Having accepted it, it should be held until the time of the giving of robes. Should he hold it in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
27. When many monks are [spending] the rains on beds and seats in forests which are held to be doubtful, [full of] various fears, and abundantly dangerous, one or another robe of the three robes may be laid aside, inside a house, by the forest [dwelling] monk, if be wishes. Should there be any reason such as that for a forest [dwelling] monk to go outside the sima, that forest [dwelling] monk may stay away, outside the sima, from that robe for six nights at the most. Should he stay away in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
28. When a month of the hot season remains, a varsasatika robe may be searched about for by a monk. When a half-month remains, having made it up, it should be put on. If a monk should search about for a varsasatikii robe with less than a month of the hot season remaining, or should put It on, having made it after a half-month .of the hot season remains, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
29. Whatever monk should knowingly confiscate for himself, individually, wealth belonging to and accumulated in the saṃgha, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
30. These are the proper medicines which have been declared by the Blessed One to be partaken of by sick monks: clarified butter, oil, honey, and molasses. These, having been held by him for seven days at the most, to be used as a stored supply, should be consumed by the sick monk if he wishes. Should he eat in excess of that, that is a niḥsargika-pāyāntika.
O Venerable Ones, the thirty nil)sargika-pāyāntika dharmas have been recited by me. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
The Ninety Pāyantika Dharmas
----------
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the ninety pāyāntika dharmas come up in the halfmonthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. In speaking a conscious lie, there is a pāyāntika.
2. In speaking of the defects of men, there is a pāyāntika.
3. In slander of monks, there is a pāyāntika,
4. Whatever monk should knowingly open up to further actions, a legal question established by the entire saṃgha according to Dharma, that is a pāyāntika.
5. Whatever monk should teach Dharma to a woman in excess of five or six words, except in the presence of a wise man, that is a pāyāntika.
6. Whatever monk should speak Dharma, step by step, to an unordained man, that is a pāyāntika,
7. Whatever monk should speak of the grave offense [of a monk] to an unordained person, except with consent of the saṃgha, that is a pāyāntika,
8. Whatever monk should speak of the superhuman faculties [of himself] to an unordained person, if it is a fact, that is a pāyāntika,
9. Whatever monk, having first given his. consent, should afterwards say: 'The Venerable Ones, for the sake of friendship, seek to confiscate for their personal use, accumulated wealth belonging to the saṃgha”; that is a pāyāntika.
10. Whatever monk, when the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation is being recited, should say: “What is the use, O Venerable Ones, of reciting these lesser and minor precepts in the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation, as they are conducive to remorse. sorrow, perplexity, regret, and contrition for the monks”; in the transgression of the moral precepts, there is a pāyāntika.
----------
11. In the destruction of all sorts of seeds and vegetables, there is a pāyantika.
12. In vexing or abusiveness, there is a pāyāntika.
13. In violating orders, there is a pāyāntika.
14. Whatever monk, placing down or throwing down a cushion, couch, chair, or four-cornered pillow in an open space belonging to the saṃgha, should then, neither removing nor having it removed, go away without asking a competent monk [for permission], except when there is a reason, that is a pāyāntika.
15. Whatever monk, spreading out or causing a bed of grass or a bed of lea ves to be spread out in a vihara belonging to the saṃgha, should then, neither removing nor having it removed, go away without asking a competent monk [for permission], except when there is a reason, that is a pāyāntika.
16. Whatever monk, being angry, mad, wrathful, and ill-tempered, should throw out or cause a monk to be thrown out of a vihara belonging to the saṃgha, except when there is a reason, that is a pāyāntika.
17. Whatever monk, although not arriving until [the beds] for the monks had been previously obtained, and having intruded, should knowingly sit down or lie down on a seat in a vihara belonging to the saṃgha, saying: “For whom this will be a burden, he should go away”; having done it for just this reason, that is a pāyāntika.
18. Whatever monk should knowingly sit down or lie down, by force, on a chair or couch having removable legs, in an elevated hut in a vihara belonging to the saṃgha, that is a pāyāntika.
19. Whatever monk should knowingly sprinkle or have grass, refuse, or clay sprinkled with water containing living creatures, that is a pāyāntika.
20. When a monk is having a large vihara built, having taken up preparations, consisting ofearth, for the window holes and for the placing ofthe bolt with regard to the door frame, means for covering it two or three times with grass should be determined. Should he determine in excess of that, that is a pāyāntika.
----------
21. Whatever monk, not having been authorized by the saṃgha, should admonish nuns, by possession ofsuch a dharma, that is a pāyāntika,
22. Whatever monk, even if authorized by the saṃgha, [should admonish nuns] at a time when the sun has gone [down], that is a pāyāntika. '
23. Whatever monk should say to a monk: “The monks admonish the nuns for the sake ofsome material goods”; that is a pāyāntika,
24. Whatever monk should give a robe to an unrelated nun, except in exchange, that is a pāyāntika.
25. Whatever monk should make a robe for an unrelated nun, that is a pāyāntika,
26. Whatever monk should go on a journey with a company of nuns, even to another village, except at the right time, that is a pāyāntika, Under those circumstances, this is the right time: when the road the company is traveling on is considered to be doubtful, dangerous, and fearful. This is the right time in this matter.
27. Whatever monk, proceeding with a company of nuns, should board one boat, going upstream or downstream, except for crossing to the opposite shore, that is a pāyāntika,
28. Whatever monk should sit down with a woman, one with the other, on a secret, concealed seat, that is a pāyāntika,
29. Whatever monk should stand with a nun, one with the other, in a secret, concealed [place], that is a pāyāntika,
30. Whatever monk should knowingly eat alms food which a nun caused to be cooked, except if it was previously undertaken by the householder, that is a Pāyantika.
No Sanskrit
31. In eating out of turn, except at the right time, there is a pāyāntika. Under those circumstances, this is the right time: a time of illness, a time of work, a time of going on a journey, or a time of the giving of robes. [This is the right time in this matter.]
32. One [meal of] alms food may be eaten by a monk who is not ill, dwelling in a village. Should he eat in excess of that, that is a pāyāntika.
33. Should many monks approach families, if faithful Brāhmana householders should offer them things such as barley-gruel and meal, two or three bowls full may be accepted by those monks if they wish. Should they accept in excess of that, that is a pāyāntika. Having accepted two or three bowls full, and going outside the ārāma, [the bowls full] should be shared by those monks with [other] monks, and it (i.e., the food) should be eaten by each. This is the proper course in this matter.
34. Whatever monk who has eaten and finished his meal, and the procedure connected with left over food is not performed, and he still eats hard food and enjoys soft food, that is a pāyāntika.5 34. Whatever monk who has eaten and finished his meal, and there are no leftovers, but he still eats hard food and enjoys soft food [obtained from another source], that is a pāyāntika. 6
35. Whatever monk, in trying to find a weak point in his fellow monk, should knowingly invite a monk who has eaten and finished, be it hard food or soft food, not invoking the principle of leftover food, saying: “Eat this, O Venerable One, enjoy this”; thinking that this monk will eat since he is searching for such taste, making a cause for him to do this, that is a pāyāntika [for the one who instigates this situation].
36. In a group meal, except at the right time, there is a pāyāntika, Under those circumstances, this is the right time: a time of illness, a time of work, a time of going on a journey, a time of being boarded on a boat, the time of a great meeting, and the meal time of the Śramaṇas, This is the right time in this matter.
37. Whatever monk should chew or consume hard food or soft food at the wrong time, that is a pāyāntika.
38. Whatever monk should chew or consume hard food or soft food which has been stored up, that is a pāyāntika.
39. Whatever monk should put food in his mouth which was not given, except for water or a tooth-brush, that is a pāyāntika.
40. These are foods for the monks declared by the Blessed One to be excellent, namely: milk, curds, fresh butter, fish, meat, and dried flesh. Whatever monk who is not ill, asking for such excellent foods from different families, for himself, should chew or consume them, that is a pāyāntika.
Summary: With living beings (rule 41), standing and sitting in a family of two (rule 42 and 43), naked ascetic (rule 44), together with an army (rule 45), two nights (rule 46), he goes to an army in action (rule 47), a beating (rule 48), threatening (rule 49), grave (rule 50).
41. Whatever monk should knowingly consume water containing living creatures, that is a pāyāntika.
42. Whatever monk, knowingly intruding in a family of two having an intention of practicing sexual union7 , should sit down on a seat, that is a pāyāntika.
43. Whatever monk, knowingly standing and hiding himself secretly in a family of two having an intention of practicing sexual union, that is a pāyāntika.
44. Whatever monk should give, with his own hand, hard food or soft food to a male naked ascetic or female naked ascetic, male wanderer or female wanderer, that is a pāyāntika.
45. Whatever monk should go to see an army fighting, that is a pāyāntika.
46. If there is some reason for a monk to go to see an army fighting, that monk may stay amongst that army for two nights at most. Should he stay in excess of that, that is a pāyāntika.
47. If a monk, dwelling amongst an army for two nights, should go to the army in action, or should enjoy the main banner, the head of the army, the array of the divisions, or the display of the forces, that is a pāyāntika.
48. Whatever monk, being angry, mad, and ill-tempered, should give a beating to a monk, that is a pāyāntika.
49. Whatever monk, being angry, mad, wrathful, and ill-tempered, should pretend to give a monk beating, even so much as to make a threatening gesture with the hand, that is a pāyāntika.
50. Whatever monk should knowingly conceal the grave offense of a monk, that is a pāyāntika.
Summary: feeling pleasant (rule 51), fire (rule 52)
51. Whatever monk should say to a monk: “Come, O Venerable One, we will approach families, and I will have them give you hard food and soft food, until you have enough”; if he, after having caused it to be given to him, says: “Go, O Venerable One. There is no pleasure for me with you, but talking and sitting alone is pleasant for me,” thinking, "This monk will be dismissed”; having done it for just this reason and not another, that is a pāyāntika.
52. Whatever monk who is not ill, for his own sake, should make, or have made, a fire, with a view to making heat, that is a pāyāntika.8
53. Whatever monk, having given his consent to a monk for formal acts of the saṃgha [done] according to Dharma, and afterwards, being angry, mad, wrathful, and ill-tempered, should raise objections.e?” saying: “Take away [my consent]. I did not give consent to the monk for those [acts]”; that is a pāyāntika.
54. Whatever monk should lie down in the same house with an unordained person for more than two nights, that is a pāyāntika,
55. Whatever monk should say: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the Blessed One, indulgences in these which have been declared by the Blessed One to be obstructive conditions are not sufficient for a hindrance”; that monk should be spoken to thus by the monks: “Do not, O Venerable One, speak thus: 'As I understand the Dharma taught by the Blessed One, indulgences in these which have been declared by the Blessed One to be obstructive conditions are not sufficient for a hindrance.' Do not speak [this] about the Blessed One. False accusation against the Blessed One is not good, and also the Blessed One has not said that. The obstructive conditions, O Venerable One, have been declared by the Blessed One in many ways to really be obstructive, and indulgences [in them] are sufficient for a hindrance, Abandon such an evil view, O Venerable One.” If that monk, being spoken to by the monks, should abandon that course, this is good. If he should not abandon it, he should be examined and instructed two or three times for the abandonment of that course. Being examined and instructed two or three times, should he abandon that course, this is good. If he should not abandon it, that is a pāyāntika.
56. Whatever monk should knowingly speak to or converse with a person who has not abandoned that evil view. and according to his word.4 1* has not made Anudharma, or should eat, dwell, or lie down in the same house with that one, that is a pāyāntika.
57. Should a male novice say: “As I understand the Dharma taught by the Blessed One, indulgences in these which have been declared by the Blessed One to be obstructive conditions are not sufficient for a hindrance”; that male novice should be 'spoken to thus by the monks: “Do not, O Venerable male novice, speak thus: 'As I understand the Dharma taught by the Blessed One. indulgences in these which have been declared by the Blessed One to be obstructive conditions are not sufficient for a hindrance.' Do not speak [this] about the Blessed One. False accusation against the Blessed One is not good, and also the Blessed One has not said that. The obstructive conditions, O male novice, have been declared by the Blessed One in many ways to really be obstructive, and indulgences [in them] are sufficient for a hindrance. Abandon such an evil view, O male novice.” If that monk, being spoken to by the monks, should abandon that course, this is good. If he should not abandon it, he should be examined and instructed two or three times for the abandonment of that course. Being examined and instructed two or three times, should he abandon that course, this is good. Ifhe should not abandon it, that male novice should be spoken to thus by the monks: "From this day on, O Venerable male novice, the Blessed One, the Tathāgata. the Arhant, the Fully Enlightened One should not be mentioned as your teacher. You should not follow behind one or another Brahmacarin, and as the other male novices obtain [the privilege of] sleeping in the same house with the monks for up to two nights, from this day on. for you this is not allowed. Go away, foolish man, you are expelled.” Whatever monk should knowingly treat kindly or meet with a male novice who has been expelled, or should lie down in the same house with that one, that is a pāyāntika.
58. When a monk obtains a new robe, one or another of three methods of disfigurement should be taken for disfigurement [of the robe]: dark blue, red. or yellow. If a monk should use a new robe, not taking up one or another of three methods for disfigurement [of the robe]: the dark blue. red, or yellow method of disfigurement, that is a pāyāntika,
59. Whatever monk should pick up with his own hand or cause a jewel or what is considered to be ajewel to be picked up, except in the ararna or in the āvāsa, that is a pāyāntika, A jewel or what is considered to be a jewel should be picked up by a monk in the arama or in the āvāsa, thinking, “This will be for he who will take it.” This is the proper course in this matter.
60. Half-monthly [bathing] was declared by the Blessed One. In bathing in excess of that, except at the right time, there is a pāyāntika. Under those circumstances, this is the right time: thinking, “One and one half months of the hot season remain,” and “the first month ofthe rains”; these two and one halfmonths, the time of heat remains: [also] at a time of illness, a time of work, a time ofrain, and a time ofwind and rain. This is the right time in this matter.
----------
61. Whatever monk should intentionally deprive an animal of life, that is a pāyāntika.
62. Whatever monk should intentionally cause remorse for a monk, thinking, “There will be no comfort or pleasure for that monk, even for a moment”; that is a pāyāntika.
63. In tickling with the fingers, there is a pāyāntika.
64. In playing in the water, there is a pāyāntika.
65. Whatever monk should lie down in the same house with a woman, that is a pāyāntika.
66. Whatever monk should frighten or cause a monk to be frightened, even in jest, that is a pāyāntika,
67. Whatever monk should hide or cause one or another of the personal belongings of a monk, nun, male novice. female novice. or female probationer to be hidden: [either a] bowl, robe, sandals, needle case, or girdle, unless thereis a reason, that is a pāyāntika,
68. Whatever monk, having given a robe to a monk, and afterwards, not having taken it back, should use it, that is a pāyāntika.
69. Whatever monk who is ill-tempered and mad should accuse a pure, faultless monk with a groundless saṃghāvaśeṣa dharma that is a pāyāntika,
70. Whatever monk, proceeding with a woman [without a man], should go on a Journey, even to another village, that is a pāyāntika.
----------
71. Whatever monk, proceeding with a caravan intending theft, should go on a journey, even to another village, that is a pāyāntika.
72. Whatever monk should ordain a person less than twenty years old to the state of monkhood, that is a pāyāntika, That person is not ordained and those monks are blameworthy. This is the proper course in this matter.
73, Whatever monk should dig the soil with his own hand or have it dug, that is a pāyāntika,
74. A four month invitation may be accepted by a monk; in excess of that is a pāyāntika, except with regard to a single invitation, a new invitation, an invitation relating to a [special] time, or a permanent invitation. This is the proper course in this matter.
75. Whatever monk, being spoken to [thus] by the monks: “This precept should be practiced by the Venerable One”; should say: “I will not practice according to the words of you who are foolish, stupid, and weak-minded; not until I shall ask monks who are masters of the Sūtras, masters of the Vinaya, and masters of the Matrkas”; that is a pāyāntika. This precept should be practiced by a monk desiring omniscience, [and also] monks who are masters of the Sūtras, masters of the Vinaya, and masters of the Matrkas should be questioned. This is the proper course in this matter.
76. Whatever monk, when the monks are quarreling, bickering, fighting, engaged in dispute, should stand silently as an eavesdropper, thinking, “I will preserve (i.e, remember) that which the monks shall say”; having done it for just this reason, that is a pāyāntika.
77. Whatever monk, when the saṃgha is engaged in pious philosophical discussion, rising from his seat, should go away without asking a competent monk for permission, except when there is a reason, that is a pāyāntika,
78. In conduct which is disrespectful, there is a pāyāntika,
79. In drinking intoxicating beverages, spirits, and liquors, there is a pāyāntika,
80. Whatever monk should enter a village at the wrong time without asking a competent monk for permission, except when there is a reason, that is a pāyāntika.
----------
81. Whatever monk, having been invited into a family for a meal, should visit amongst families before a mea! or after a meal, when the family [which invited him] is unawares, except whenthereis a reason, that is a pāyāntika,
82. Whatever monk should cross the threshold or vicinity of the threshold of a consecrated ksatriya king when night has not ended and the sun has not risen, and when the jewels or what are considered to be jewels have not been removed, except when there is a reason, that is a pāyāntika.
83. Whatever monk, when the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra is being recited, should say: “Just now, O Venerable Ones, do I understand this dharma which is included in the Sūtra, occurs in the Sutra, and comes up in the recitation”; and if the monks should know, with regard to the Venerable One, that the Venerable One has previously sat in the Poṣadha ceremony two or three times, not to say oftener, there is no freedom for the ignorant monk. Then [that monk] who has fallen into offense should be dealt with according to Dharma, and further remorse should be imposed [on him], saying, “For you, O Venerable One, this which has been obtained improperly and not properly is unobtained and unacquired. You, when the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra is being recited, do not listen respectfully, do not pay respect, do not make supplication, do not meditate with a one-pointed mind, do not listen with an attentive ear, and do not listen with the conviction of the entire mind. Therefore, O Venerable One, because ofremorse, there is a pāyāntika.'
84. Whatever monk should have a needle case made that is made of bone or made of horn, that is a pāyāntika involving breaking.
85. When a monk is having a couch or chair made for the saṃgha, the legs should be made measuring eight fingers of the Sugata [measure high], except for the notched part below. Should he have it made in excess of that, there is a pāyāntika involving cutting [down].
86. Whatever monk should Cover or have a couch or chair covered with cotton, that is a pāyāntika involving tearing [off].
87. When a monk is having a rug for sitting on made, it should be made according to measure. This is the measure here: in length, two spans of the Sugata-span; in width, one and one half; a span all round for a border. Should he have it made in excess of that, there is a pāyāntika involving breaking.
88. When a monk is having an itch bandage made, it should be made according to measure. This is the measure here: in length, four spans of the Sugata-span; in width, two [spans]. Should he have it made in excess of that, there is a pāyāntika involving cutting [down].
89. When a monk is having a varsasatika robe made, it should be made according to measure. This is the measure here: in length, six spans of the Sugata-span ; in width, two and one half [spans]. Should he have it made in excess of that, there is a pāyāntika involving cutting [down].
90. Whatever monk should have a robe made the measure of the Sugata's robe or in excess of the Sugata's robe, that is a pāyāntika. This is the measure of the Sugata's robe: in length, nine spans; in width, sixth spans. This is the measure of the Sugata's robe.
O Venerable Ones, the ninety pāyāntika dharmas have been recited by me. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
The Four Pratideśanīya Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the four pratideśanīya dharmas come up in the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. Whatever monk, having accepted hard food or soft food, with his own hand, in the presence of an unrelated nun who has wandered amongst the houses for alms food, should chew or consume it, that should be confessed in the presence of the monks by that monk, going outside the arama, saying: "Having fallen into an unwholesome position, O Venerable Ones, I am blameworthy. Therefore, I confess that pratideśanīya dharma.” This is a pratideśanīya dharma.
2. Many monks eat, having been invited amongst families. If a nun should stand there indicating, “Give soft food here; give boiled rice; give sauce”; that nun should be spoken to thus by the monks: “You should wait for a moment, Sister, until the monks eat.” If even one monk should not speak to remove that nun, that should be confessed in the presence of the monks by all those monks, going outside the arama, saying: “Having fallen into an unwholesome position, O Venerable Ones, we are blameworthy. Therefore, we confess that pratideśanīya dharma.” This is a pratideśanīya dharma.
3. There are families which have been considered by formal declaration to be undergoing training. Whatever monk, having been previously uninvited and having accepted hard food and soft food amongst such families which have been considered by formal declaration of the saṃgha to be undergoing training, should chew or consume it, that should be confessed in the presence of the monks by that monk, going outside the arama, saying: “Having fallen into an unwholesome position, I confess that pratideśanīya dharma.” This is a pratideśanīya dharma.
4. There are forest dwellings which are considered by the saṃgha to be doubtful, dangerous, and fearful. Whatever monk, in such forest dwellings which are considered by the saṃgha to be doubtful, dangerous, and fearful, being previously unawares, should 'chew or consume hard food and soft food in the forest outside of the arama, that should be confessed in the presence of the monks by that monk, saying: “Having fallen into an unwholesome position, O Venerable Ones, I am blameworthy. Therefore, I confess that pratideśanīya dharma.” This is a pratideśanīya dharma.
O Venerable Ones, the four pratideśanīya dharmas have been recited by me. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
The Many Śaikṣa Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the many śaikṣa dharmas come up in the halfmonthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. “We will put on the inner robe wrapped around,” is a precept which should be observed.
2. “We will not put on the inner robe raised too high,” is a precept which should be observed.
3. “We will not put on the inner robe too low,” is a precept which should be observed.
4. “We will not put on the inner robe like the trunk of an elephant,” is a precept which should be observed.
5. “We will not put on the inner robe like a palm leaf," is a precept whichshould be observed.
6. “We will not put on the inner robe like a ball of grain,” is a precept which should be observed.
7. “We willnot put on the inner robe like the head of a serpent,” is a precept which should be observed.
8. “We will put on the robe wrapped around,” is a precept which should be observed.
9. “We will not put on the robe raised too high,” is a precept which should be observed.
10. “We will not put on the robe too low,” is a precept which should be observed.
11. “We will go amongst the houses well restrained,” is a precept which should be observed.
12. “We will go amongst the houses [with the body] well covered,” is a precept which should be observed. .
13. “'Ve will go amongst the houses with little noise,” is a precept which should be observed.
14. “We will go amongst the houses without uplifted eyes,” is a precept which should be observed.
IS. “We will go amongst the houses looking at the ground,” is a precept which should be observed.
16. “We will not go amongst the houses with the head covered,” is a precept which should be observed.
17. “We will not go amongst the houses with lifted up [robes],” is a precept which should be observed.
18. “We will not go amongst the houses in the utsaktika posture,” is a precept which should be observed.
19. “We will not go amongst the houses in the vyastika posture,” is a precept which should be observed.
20. “We will not go amongst the houses in the paryastika posture,” is a precept which should be observed.
21. “We will not go amongst the houses jumping,” is a precept which should be observed.
22. “We will not go amongst the houses with the hands touching the feet,” is a precept which should be observed.
23. “We willnot go amongst the houses in a squatting posture,” is a precept which should be observed.
24. “We will not go amongst the houses kneeling down,” is a precept which should be observed.
25. “We will not go amongst the houses with arms akimbo,” is a precept which should be observed.
26. “We will not go amongst the houses shaking the body,” is a precept which should be observed.
27. “We will not go amongst the houses shaking the arms,” is a precept which should be observed.
28. “We will not go amongst the houses shaking the head,” is a precept which should be observed.
29. “We will not go amongst the houses with shoulders together,” is a precept which should be observed.
30. “We will not go amongst the houses joining the hands,” is a precept which should be observed.
31. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses without being authorized," is a precept which should be observed.
32. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses without examining the seat,” is a precept which should be observed.
33. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses putting down [the weight of] the whole body,” is a precept which should be observed.
34. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses placing one foot on the other,” is a precept which should be observed.
35. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses placing one ankle on the other,” is a precept which should be observed.
36. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses placing one thigh on the other,” is a precept which should be observed.
37. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses pulling up the feet,” is a precept which should be observed.
38. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses stretching out the feet,” is a precept which should be observed.
39. “We will not sit down on a seat amidst the houses exposing the genitals,” is a precept which should be observed.
40. “We will accept alms food respectfully,” is a precept which should be observed.
41. “We will accept alms food [only] full to the brim [of the bowl],” is a precept which should be observed.
42. “We will accept alms food with an equal amount of sauce,” is a precept which should be observed.
43. “We will accept alms food uninterruptedly,” is a precept which should be observed.
44. “We will not present the bowl when hard food and soft food has not come,” is a precept which should be observed.
45. “We will not cover up sauce with boiled rice,” is a precept which should be observed.
46. “Taking up the desire for more, [we will not cover up] boiled rice with sauce,” is a precept which should be observed.
47. “We will not hold out a bowl with reference to hard food and soft food,” is a precept which should be observed.
----------
48. “We will eat alms food respectfully,” is a precept which should be observed.
49. “We will not eat al-is food finely broken up,” is a precept which should be observed.
50. “We will not eat alms food in overly large mouthfuls,” is a precept which should be observed.
51. “Wc will separate the morsels into [little] balls,” is a precept which should be observed.
52. “We will not open the mouth when the morsel has not arrived,” is a precept which should be observed.
53. “We will not utter inarticulate speech with a morsel in the mouth,” is a precept which shou j be observed.
54. “We will not eat alms food making the cuccat sound,” is a precept which should be observed.
55. “We will not eat alms food making the susasut sound,” is a precept which should be observed.
56. “We will not eat alms food making the thutyut sound,” is a precept which should be observed.
57. “We will not eat alms food making the phuphphuph sound,” is a precept which should be observed.
58. “We will not eat alms food sticking out the tongue,” is a precept which should be observed.
59. “We will not eat alms food separating boiled rice,” is a precept which should be observed.
60. “We will not eat alms food when an interruption is made,"58* is a precept which should be observed.
61. “We will not eat alms food stuffing 59* the cheeks,” is a precept which should be observed.
62. “We will not eat alms food making a sma~king noise with the tongue,” is a precept which should be observed.
63. “We will not eat alms food dividing mouthfuls,” is a precept which should be observed.
64. “We will not eat alms food licking the hands,” is a precept which should be observed.
65. “We will not eat alms food licking the howl,” is a precept which should be observed.
66. “We will not eat alms food shaking the hands," is a precept which should be observed.
67. “We will not eat alms food shaking the bowl,” is a precept which should be observed.
68. “We will not eat alms food separating the unformed [food] into a stūpa [shape], is a precept which should be observed.
----------
69. “We will not, in seeking to annoy, look into the bowl of a nearby monk,” is a precept which should be observed.
70. “We will not accept a water potwith living creatures [in it],” is a precept which should be observed.
71. “We Will. not sprinkle a nearby monk with water containing' flesh,” is a precept which should be observed.
72. “We will not throwaway water containing flesh amongst the houses,” is a precept which should be observed.
73. “We will not throwaway remains of food with the bowl.” is a precept which should be observed.
74. “We will not place the bowl on a place on the ground that is uncovered,” is a precept which should be observed.
75. “We will not place the bowl on a slope, cliff, or mountain,” is a precept which should be observed.
76. “We shall not wash the bowl while standing,” is a precept which should be observed.
77. “We will not wash the bowl on a slope. diff, or mountain,” is a precept which should be observed.
78. “We willnot take water in the bowl from the current of a flowing river,” is a precept which should be observed.
79. “Standing, we will not teach Dharma to one sitting who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
80. “Sitting, we will not teach Dharma to one who is lying down who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
81. “Seated on a low seat, we will not teach Dharma to one seated on a high seat who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
82. “Going behind, we will not teach Dharma to one going in front who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
83. “Going at the side of the road, we will not teach Dharma to one going on the road who isnot ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
84. “We will not teach Dharma to one having his head covered who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
85. “We will not teach Dharma to one having lifted up [robes] who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
86. “We will not teach Dharma to one in the utsaktika posture who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
87. “We will not teach Dharma to one in the vyastika posture who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
88. “We will not teach Dhanna to one in the paryastika posture who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
89. “We will not teach Dharma to one having braided hair, who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
90. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a cap on the head who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
91. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a crown on the head who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
92. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a garland on the head who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
93. “We will not teach dharma to one having the head veiled who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
94. “We will not teach Dharma to one mounted on an elephant who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
95. “We will not teach Dharma to one mounted on a horse who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
96. “We will not teach Dharma to one mounted on a palanquin who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
97. “We will not teach Dharma to one mounted on a vehicle who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
98. “We will not teach Dharma to one wearing shoes who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
99. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a stick in his hand who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
100. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a parasol in his hand who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
101. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a knife in his hand who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
102. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a sword in his hand who is not ill,” is a precept which should be obseryed.
103. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a weapon in his hand who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
104. “We will not teach Dharma to one having a coat of mail,” who is not ill,” is a precept which should be observed.
105. “Not being ill, we will not make excrement or urine [while] standing,” is a precept which should be observed.
106. “Not being ill, we will not throw excrement, urine, phlegm, snot, or other evacuated substances in the water,” is a precept which should be observed.
107. “Not being ill, we will not throw excrement, urine, phlegm, snot, or other evacuated substances on a spot on the ground [covered] with grass,” is a precept which should be observed.
108. “We will not climb on a tree higher than a man unless there is a disaster,” is a precept which should be observed.
O Venerable Ones, the many śaikṣa dharmas have been recited by me. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones-Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
Adhikaraṇa-Śamatha Dharmas
----------
Now, O Venerable Ones, the seven adhikaraṇa-śamatha dharmas come up in the half-monthly Prātimokṣa Sūtra recitation.
1. To a case worthy of settlement in the presence of, we shall impart settlement in the presence of.
2. To a case worthy of settlement based on recollection of, we shall impart settlement based on recollection of.
3. To a case worthy of settlement for one no longer insane, we shall impart settlement for one no longer insane.
4. To a case worthy of settlement by majority vote, we shall impart settlement by majority vote.
5. To a case worthy of settlement investigating the special nature [of the accused monk], we shall impart settlement investigating the special nature [of the accused monk].
6. To a case worthy of settlement which covers over, as with grass, we shall impart settlement which covers over, as with grass.
7. To a case worthy of settlement which effects confession, we shall impart settlement which effects confession.
We should cause legal questions which have arisen to be settled, stilled, according to the Dharma, Vinaya, and Teaching ofthe Teacher, by imparting these seven adhikarana-samatha dharmas.
Venerable Ones, the seven adhikarana-samatha dharmas have been recited by me. Therefore, I ask the Venerable Ones – Are you completely pure in this matter?A second and also a third time I ask-Are you completely pure in this matter?Since there is silence, the Venerable Ones are completely pure in this matter. Thus do I understand.
----------
1. Enduring patience is the highest austerity, Nirvāṇa is the highest, say the Buddhas; for he who harms others is not a monk, he who violates others is not a śramaṇa.  2. Just as one endowed with sight, in exerting effort, [should avoid] misconduct; so the wise man should avoid the evils in the world of men.  3. Not censuring [others], not harming others, and restraint according to the Prātimokṣa; moderation in eating, secluded dwelling, and union with adhicitta; this is the Teaching of the Buddhas,  4. As a bee, not agitating the scent or color of a flower, flies away, taking [only] the nectar; so should a sage enter a village.  5. [One should not contemplate] the faults of others, or what is done and not done by others; but one should contemplate the same difficulties concerning himself.  6. For the wise one, trained in the steps of sagehood, there is no delight in superior intellect; for the tranquil protector, always mindful, there are no sorrows.  7. Merit increases for one who gives, enmitydoes not accumulate for one who is well restrained; the virtuous one renounces evil, and because of putting an end to the kleśas, attains bliss, 8. Not to do any evil, to attain good, to completely subdue one's own mind; this is the Teaching of the Buddhas,  9. Restraint of the body is good, restraint of speech is good, and restraint in all regards is good; the monk who is restrained in all regards is released from all suffering.  10. He who guards his speech, is well restrained in his mind, and does not perform evil with his body; being purified regarding the paths of action in these three, shall attain the road proclaimed by the ṛṣis.  11 and 12. This Prātimokṣa was recited in detail by these seven celebrated, self-possessed Buddhas who were the chief protectors and guardians of the world: Vipaśyin, Śikhin, Viśvabhu, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, Kāśyapa, and immediately following, Śākyamuni Gautama, the God of Gods, the charioteer who subdued men.  13. The Buddhas and Śrāvakas of the Buddhas are respectful toward it [i.e., the Prātimokṣa]; being respectful toward it, one obtains the unconditioned path.  14. Go forth, cling to, employ the Teaching of the Buddhas; destroy the army of the Lord of Death, like an elephant [destroys] a house of reeds.  15. One who will diligently engage in this Dharma and Vinaya, having abandoned birth and samsara, shall put an end to suffering.  16. This Prātimokṣa has been recited, and Poṣadha made by the saṃgha, for the increase of the Teaching, and for the sake of mutual protection of Śīla.  17. For the sake of those for whom the Sūtra has been recited, and for the sake of those for whom Poṣadha has been made, you should guard Sila, as a yak protects its first-born.  18. Whatever merit has been gained from the full exposition of the Prātimokṣa, by that may this entire world obtain the position of the Chief of Sages.
The Prātimokṣa is concluded.
----------